America land of the free home of the
brave inventor of Chinese food now as
you know America is made up of 50 states
as a child you may have been forced to
learn to sing them in order that is
impressive especially especially because
that is a difficult song the British
version is a little simpler it goes like
this England Scotland Northern Ireland
Wales and now this song is done I will
say the song used to be a lot longer but
but of course 50/50 States does not
quite tell the whole American story
you might remember earlier this year we
talked about US territories like Puerto
Rico and Guam but there is one other
u.s. population which suffers a lack of
representation in DC and that's DC
itself if you've ever visited you
probably noticed that license plates a
taxation without representation and
that's for a pretty good reason
Washington DC isn't like your typical
city in America Congress has the final
say over its budget and laws and DC does
not have full representation on the hill
the Chinese pandas at the National Zoo
have as much right to representation in
the US Congress as any resident in the
District of Columbia okay okay but to be
fair that is probably for the best we we
don't need those pandas participating in
representative democracy we need them
and we need them to
they're in danger the voting rights of
mahjongg and Chan Chan can wait right
now it's a clock you weird pile
chromatic raccoons on steroids take a
trip to pound town pronto look you can
you can understand why many people in DC
are angry because think about it they
pay federal taxes and fight in wars and
yet have no member of Congress who's
able to vote on their behalf even though
their population is larger than Vermont
and Wyoming and their gross domestic
product is higher than that of 16 states
and if you think it well isn't this just
how countries treat their capital cities
it actually isn't
we're the only democracy in the world
that does this in fact when the Dalai
Lama came to visit he wondered why a
small pocket of people living in the
world's champion of democracy lacked
full voting rights calling it quite
strange quite strange and it is not good
when a guy from Tibet says wow this
situation is really undemocratic someone
should do something about it does
Richard Gere know about this someone
should tell him now to be fair DC does
have a member of Congress eleanor holmes
norton but there are some strict limits
on her powers I vote in committee but I
cannot do that which every American
would believe is emblematic of
citizenship and that is vote on the
House floor vote on whether your taxes
go up or go down vote on whether you go
to war or not can't do that
so she basically has pretend power like
a child watching Dora the Explorer oh
yeah Dora took her map out of her
backpack because you told her to just
just keep believing that your tiny
idiots grow up
and for more than two decades she's
introduced bill after bill to grant DC
IVA statehood or a vote in Congress and
by the way you do not want to interrupt
her while she's arguing for it
someone tried eight years ago and it did
not work out too well for me you know
Graham not during my time to you you
would have had your say and your say has
been that you think that the people who
live in your capital are not entitled to
a vote in their house shame on you mr.
Smith goes to Washington except she was
already in Washington and doesn't have
the power to do anything at this point
it might be helpful to just take a
moment and explain how DC got into this
mess back in the late 1700s there was no
permanent US Capitol it was just
wherever Congress met meaning it was in
eight different cities but after
Congress was mobbed by veterans
demanding back pain the Pennsylvania
mutiny of 1793 they decided they needed
an enclave under their own control so
they added a clause to the Constitution
which said that Congress shall have the
power to exercise exclusive legislation
in all cases whatsoever over a federal
district which is pretty significant
power as far as documents demanding
control go it's right up there with the
one Christian gray asked Anastasia
Steele to sign in 50 shades of grey
before he pinched her butts or whatever
I haven't seen it for obvious reasons
Jamie Dornan was and remains hashtag not
my Christian
but dc-dc went under federal control in
1801 and it wasn't until the 1960s the
DC's then three quarters of a million
citizens mostly African African American
were given even the most basic electoral
rights until 1964 residents could not
even vote in presidential elections it
took a constitutional amendment to
bestow that right a few years later
Congress granted limited home rule
allowing DC voters to elect a mayor and
city council but required all
legislation including the city's budget
be subject to congressional approval and
with that level of restriction the mayor
of DC gets to run the city the way a
student council president gets to run
her high school oh sure Kelsey pick the
theme for prom but will control the
budget and Eyes Wide Shut is not an
acceptable theme we are not having a
repeat of last year it was a mess and it
was surprisingly boring now to be fair
to be fair here Congress very rarely
rejects DC's decisions outright which
sounds good unfortunately instead they
attach so-called riders to DC's
appropriations bills stripping out
funding for things that they don't like
and given that DC is a fairly liberal
and diverse City and Congress is
frequently neither of those things over
the years Congress has repeatedly
stepped in whenever DC is about to do
something that they might disapprove of
for example just last November
70% of Washingtonians voted to legalize
possession of marijuana and DC's
residents were pretty excited about that
this string is a string called mrs.
buttersworth
it is illegal what you're doing right
now very much it won't be illegal
tomorrow correct that is correct what is
that like to come out of the shadows of
the work
it's literally for me literally coming
out of the closet I can literally take
my butt
at long last my tents can come out of
its profits and the hydroponic plant
inside it can proudly say I'm here my
side effects include drowsiness the
desire to make cloth out of bugles on
your fingertips and fear get used to it
get to it because I'm here and I look
good ok but then Republicans in Congress
stepped in and passed a rider forbidding
DC from using their funds to enact that
law and if you're wondering how that
squares with the conservative ethos of
limited government and states rights
well here is how one of those
congressmen justified it well Washington
DC is a lot of state and Washington DC
has a lot to offer but you know free
rein on marijuana use I just don't buy
that I just don't think that's that's
the way they should operate so states
rights yes but Washington DC is not a
state you know you have a weak argument
when you're clinging to the precise
wording you used hey I said I wouldn't
any other women this is my squash
mate Gary having sex with women
no but Gary is not a woman you stay here
Gary let her leave now now DC managed to
find a loophole that let them in acts
that marijuana law anyway but other laws
have not been so lucky for nearly a
decade Congress successfully blocked DC
from using its own tax dollars to fund a
needle exchange program to battle the
HIV epidemic and one of the men
responsible for that
Georgia Representative Bob Barr
explained why I would also remind our
colleagues of a very basic principle if
you give people the means to do
something and encourage them to do it
well for heaven's sake no surprise they
will do it okay that is just ridiculous
because providing clean needles to drug
users is not the same as putting out a
bowl of chips and a party no one sees a
needle exchange and thinks well I had no
intention of ever taking heroin but
seeing as you've offered you know what
don't mind if I do
how
I don't want to be rude but but it's a
little hard to hear him object to DC
funding needle exchanges when you hear a
little fact later mentioned by one of
his colleagues
I trust that mr. mr. Barr is aware that
Georgia has a needle exchange program
yes
Georgia had a needle exchange program
too
and what's the representative bar think
that theirs was for injecting peach
cobbler intravenously oh I couldn't eat
another bite but I sure as ain't
done yet let me ride the peach show let
me ride the peach there were
consequences to that rider in the nine
years that DC was denied its needle
exchanges more than 1,500 injection drug
users were diagnosed with HIV in the
district and interestingly since DC
finally funded their needle exchanges in
2008 HIV diagnosis linked to injecting
drugs went down by 87 percent because of
course they did needle exchanges are
always preferable to the alternative try
think of needles as bridesmaid dresses
anyone who tells you you can reuse them
does not have your best interests at
heart just eat the $200 and throw it
away Cheryl she screwed you she screwed
all the girls
it seems that Congress just forces
riders on DC whenever they disapprove of
how they're spending their own money
they are treating more than 600,000
people right now like children and in
case you think I'm exaggerating listen
to Florida Congressman John mica explain
why DC should not get full control over
their budget well when my kids were
young teenagers they always wanted the
budget autonomy - so you believe
district leaders or children is that
what you're saying they're not ready no
but they have matured we just don't want
regression no no I'm not saying they're
children I'm just saying they can't be
trusted with money until they learn some
responsibility and until then we should
give them an allowance you know now that
I'm hearing
I am calling them children that is that
is absolutely what I'm doing but the
award for the most depressingly cynical
thing that has ever been said about DC
actually goes to our current president
who in 2011 avoided a government
shutdown by striking a deal with John
Boehner that included prohibiting DC
from spending its own money on abortions
for low-income women saying and I quote
John I will give you DC abortion are not
happy about it and the only time trading
away DC abortion would be acceptable is
if DC abortion is a rare 1950s comic
book and you're getting Marvel's the
amazing mammogram in return that is it
otherwise that's not great look the
people of DC clearly deserve a greater
voice in their own affairs and they've
actually come tantalizingly close to
getting a voting representative in
Congress in 2009 a bill to give DC a
volt was introduced in the Senate and
the Senate did the most dickish thing
imaginable passing it but with a little
addition well you know they passed a
major hurdle today getting this DC
voting rights bill through the Senate
but not without a highly controversial
amendment attached to it this amendment
would repeal all of DC's gun control
laws oh she's not kidding that amendment
would have repealed their ban on
semi-automatic weapons removes criminal
penalties for unregistered firearms and
even altered their ability to enact
future gun control legislation it was
the kind of amendment NRA CEO Wayne
LaPierre dreams about as he sleeps in
his bullet filled bathtub
I presume as a result of that amendment
the bill was dropped and DC has not been
close to getting a vote since and the
problem is even if they eventually get
one
Congress could still add riders to mess
with DC's laws and that's why many
Washingtonians want full statehood but
that's probably a long shot because last
year Congress held its first hearing on
DC statehood in 21 years and the turnout
was not encouraging the sad thing was
only two members two senators of that
committee actually showed up to listen
to
testimony today that's pathetic yeah it
was only two turned up that's not just a
pathetic attendance for a hearing on
Capitol Hill that would be pathetic for
a one-year-olds birthday party really
Mikey just your mom and dad you haven't
made any other friends in an entire year
put yourself out there my kid
the world is waiting for you my kid and
look whether the fix is a vote or
statehood something has to happen the
problem is inertia is a really powerful
force and opponents might say well we
can't grant a DC statehood we'd have to
change the Constitution but we could do
that the whole point of amendments is to
fix things that no longer make any sense
it's happened 27 times and Counting
others will say well hold on we have to
change the flag but we could do that
we're sure it would look slightly
different but we've been using a 51 star
flag for this whole segment and none of
you are noticed and yes yes it
would probably screw up the songs that
we learned as children but we could
change those too in fact until DC
situation is fixed we've taken the
liberty of adding an amendment to that
song would you like to hear it boys and
girls
how're you doing
Donna sing a song about the 50 states
the inequities inherent in living in our
nation's capital kids now specific about
the problem it's horrifying but it's
true the solution
you're totally convinced that there
should be just 50 states
you